README.md, before:

# plugin-odem-rest

exposing RESTful access on Hitchy's ODM

[Hitchy](http://hitchyjs.org) is a server-side framework for developing web applications with [Node.js](https://nodejs.org). [Odem](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hitchy-plugin-odem) is plugin for Hitchy implementing an object document management (ODM) using data backends like regular file systems, LevelDBs and temporary in-memory databases.
 
This plugin is defining blueprint routes for accessing data managed in ODM using REST API.


## Installation

In your Hitchy-based application run

```bash
npm i hitchy-plugin-odem-rest hitchy-plugin-odem
```

The command is installing this plugin and the additionally required [hitchy-plugin-odem](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hitchy-plugin-odem). 

:::warning Compatibility  
Starting with version 0.4.0 the latter plugin must be installed 
explicitly.  
::: 

## Usage

This module strongly depends on [hitchy-plugin-odem](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hitchy-plugin-odem) and its preparation of model definitions discovered by [Hitchy's core](https://hitchyjs.github.io/core/). There are separate documentations for either feature.

For a quick start create folder **api/models** in your Hitchy-based project and add another file for every model of your application.

Let's assume there is a file **api/models/local-employee.js** containing this code:

```javascript
module.exports = {
	props: {
		lastName: {
			type: "string",
			required: true,
		},
		firstName: {
			type: "string",
			required: true,
		},
		birthday: {
			type: "date",
		},
		salary: {
			type: "number",
		},
		availableForOutsourcing: {
			type: "boolean",
		},
	},
	computed: {
		fullName() {
			return `${this.lastName}, ${this.firsName}`;
		}
	},
};
```

When starting your Hitchy-based application it will discover a model named **LocalEmployee** and expose it via REST API using URLs like `/api/local-employee` just because of this module and its two dependencies in context of your application as mentioned before.

#### Models of Hitchy Plugins

Due to the way Hitchy is discovering plugins and compiling [components](https://hitchyjs.github.io/core/internals/components.html) defined there this plugin is always covering models defined in installed plugins as well.


### How it works

This plugin is defining a set of [blueprint routes](https://hitchyjs.github.io/core/internals/routing-basics.html#focusing-on-routes) implementing REST API for every model defined in file system as described before.

Those routes comply with this pattern:

* `<prefix>/<model>` is addressing a model or its collection of items
* `<prefix>/<model>/<uuid>` is addressing a single item of a model

The prefix is `/api` by default. It is adjustable by putting content like this into file **config/model.js**:

```javascript
exports.model = {
    urlPrefix: "/my/custom/prefix"
};
```

The model's segment in URL `<model>` is derived as the kebab-case version of model's name which is given in PascalCase. Thus the model in file **api/models/my-fancy-model.js** is assumed to define model named **MyFancyModel** by default, resulting in model's URL segment to be **my-fancy-model** again. So the URL path for the collection of items is `/api/my-fancy-model`.

In Hitchy's ODM all model instances or items are uniquely addressable via UUID. By appending an item's UUID to the given URL path of a collection you get the URL path of that item, e.g. `/api/my-fancy-model/01234567-1234-1234-1234-56789abcdef0`.


### The REST API

The provided routes implement these actions:

| Method | URL | Action |
|---|---|---|
| GET | `/api/model` | Lists items of selected model. |
| GET | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Fetches properties of selected item. |
| PUT | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Replaces all properties of selected item with those given in request body. Selected item is created when missing. |
| PATCH | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Adjusts selected item by replacing values of properties given in request body (leaving those missing in request body untouched). |
| POST | `/api/model` | Creates new item initialized with properties provided in request body. |
| DELETE | `/api/model/<uuid>`  | Removes selected item from model's collection. |
| HEAD | `/api/model` | Tests if selected model exists. |
| HEAD | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Tests if selected item exists. |

The API is accepting and returning data in JSON format. Any returned data is always an object. When fetching items this object contains single property `items` containing all fetched items as array.

Response status code is used to indicate basic result of either requests.

| Status | Reason |
|---|---|
| 200 | A request was successful. In case of HEAD-request the tested model or item exists. |
| 201 | A POST request was successful in creating another item. This isn't used when creating new item using PUT request, though. |
| 400 | A given UUID is malformed. |
| 404 | A requested model or item wasn't found. |
| 405 | A given method isn't allowed on selected model or item. This is basically a more specific information related to performing some invalid request like trying to PATCH or DELETE a whole model instead of a single item. |


### Convenience Routes

By default, the module is exposing another set of routes for every model that enables requesting either supported action using GET-requests. This is assumed to be very useful in development e.g. to conveniently add or remove items using regular browser.

The URL path is extended to insert an action's name after the model's name and before some optionally given UUID.

| Convenience Route | Related REST Action |
|---|---|
| `GET /api/model/create` | `POST /api/model` |
| `GET /api/model/write/<uuid>` | `PATCH /api/model/<uuid>` |
| `GET /api/model/replace/<uuid>` | `PUT /api/model/<uuid>` |
| `GET /api/model/has/<uuid>` | `HEAD /api/model/<uuid>` |
| `GET /api/model/remove/<uuid>` | `DELETE /api/model/<uuid>` |

There are no extra routes following this pattern for actions that are exposed via GET-methods already.

All request data is provided in query parameters instead of request body for GET requests don't have a body.

#### Disabling Feature

This feature may be disabled using configuration in file **config/model.js** exposing configuration like this one:

```javascript
exports.model = {
    convenience: false,
};
``` 


### Extended Fetching of Items

Whenever fetching a list of items using GET request on a model's URL there are additional options for controlling the retrieved list.


#### Filtering

Using query parameter `q` the list of fetched items can be limited to those items matching criteria given in that query parameter. The abbreviated name `q` just refers to a _search query_.

##### Simple Comparisons

The search query may comply with the pattern `name:operation:value` to compare every item's property with a given value using one of these operations:
  
| Name | Test Operation           |
|------|--------------------------|
| eq   | is equal                 |
| neq  | is not equal             |
| lt   | is less than             |
| lte  | is less than or equal    |
| gt   | is greater than          |
| gte  | is greater than or equal |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=lastName:eq:Doe` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with property **lastName** equal given value **Doe**. The value may contain further colons.

##### Simple Unary Tests

Alternatively the search query may comply with the pattern `name:operation` for testing the named property using one of these supported operations:
  
| Name    | Test Operation                              |
|---------|---------------------------------------------|
| null    | property is set / has any value             |
| notnull | property is unset / does not have any value |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=lastName:null` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with unset property **lastName**.

##### Simple Unary Tests

Another kind of test operations are unary tests. A unary test is an operation which takes a single argument, only. This argument is the property's name the test is applied on. Related queries comply with the pattern `name:operation`.
  
| Name    | Test Operation                                                 |
|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| null    | property's value is unset                                      |
| notnull | property's value is set                                        |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=paid:null` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with value of property **paid** unset.

##### Simple Ternary Tests

A third type of test operations are ternary tests. This refers to operations consisting of three parameters: the property's name and two values instead of one to compare that property's values with. Related queries comply with the pattern `name:operation:value:value`, hence using colon in first given value is not supported.
  
| Name    | Test Operation                                                 |
|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| between | property's value is between the two given values (inclusively) |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=salary:between:2000:4000` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with value of property **salary** in range from 2000 to 4000.

##### Complex Tests

There will be more complex tests supported in future versions using different formats in query parameter `q`.


#### Sorting

Using query parameter `sortBy=lastName` a fetched list of items is sorted by values of named property (which is `lastName` in this example) in ascending order. By providing another query parameter `descending=1` the sorting is done in descending order.


#### Slicing

Query parameter `limit=n` is requesting to fetch at most **n** items. Parameter `offset=n` is requesting to skip **n** items before starting retrieval. Slicing is applied after sorting items.

When slicing this way only a subset of basically available items is fetched by intention. If you need to know the total number of available items when requesting a slice you can either set custom field `x-count` in request header or query parameter `count` to `1` or any other truthy value. This will have a slight negative impact on request performance, but causes delivery of the total number of matching items in a separate property `count` of response body as well as in response header named `x-count`.

Commit message:

adding new routes for fetching schema information

README.md, after:

# plugin-odem-rest

exposing RESTful access on Hitchy's ODM

[Hitchy](http://hitchyjs.org) is a server-side framework for developing web applications with [Node.js](https://nodejs.org). [Odem](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hitchy-plugin-odem) is plugin for Hitchy implementing an object document management (ODM) using data backends like regular file systems, LevelDBs and temporary in-memory databases.
 
This plugin is defining blueprint routes for accessing data managed in ODM using REST API.


## Installation

In your Hitchy-based application run

```bash
npm i hitchy-plugin-odem-rest hitchy-plugin-odem
```

The command is installing this plugin and the additionally required [hitchy-plugin-odem](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hitchy-plugin-odem). 

:::warning Compatibility  
Starting with version 0.4.0 the latter plugin must be installed 
explicitly.  
::: 

## Usage

This module strongly depends on [hitchy-plugin-odem](https://www.npmjs.com/package/hitchy-plugin-odem) and its preparation of model definitions discovered by [Hitchy's core](https://hitchyjs.github.io/core/). There are separate documentations for either feature.

For a quick start create folder **api/models** in your Hitchy-based project and add another file for every model of your application.

Let's assume there is a file **api/models/local-employee.js** containing this code:

```javascript
module.exports = {
	props: {
		lastName: {
			type: "string",
			required: true,
		},
		firstName: {
			type: "string",
			required: true,
		},
		birthday: {
			type: "date",
		},
		salary: {
			type: "number",
		},
		availableForOutsourcing: {
			type: "boolean",
		},
	},
	computed: {
		fullName() {
			return `${this.lastName}, ${this.firstName}`;
		}
	},
};
```

When starting your Hitchy-based application it will discover a model named **LocalEmployee** and expose it via REST API using URLs like `/api/local-employee` just because of this module and its two dependencies in context of your application as mentioned before.

#### Models of Hitchy Plugins

Due to the way Hitchy is discovering plugins and compiling [components](https://hitchyjs.github.io/core/internals/components.html) defined there this plugin is always covering models defined in installed plugins as well.


### How it works

This plugin is defining a set of [blueprint routes](https://hitchyjs.github.io/core/internals/routing-basics.html#focusing-on-routes) implementing REST API for every model defined in file system as described before.

Those routes comply with this pattern:

* `<prefix>/<model>` is addressing a model or its collection of items
* `<prefix>/<model>/<uuid>` is addressing a single item of a model

The prefix is `/api` by default. It is adjustable by putting content like this into file **config/model.js**:

```javascript
exports.model = {
    urlPrefix: "/my/custom/prefix"
};
```

The model's segment in URL `<model>` is derived as the kebab-case version of model's name which is given in PascalCase. Thus the model in file **api/models/my-fancy-model.js** is assumed to define model named **MyFancyModel** by default, resulting in model's URL segment to be **my-fancy-model** again. So the URL path for the collection of items is `/api/my-fancy-model`.

In Hitchy's ODM all model instances or items are uniquely addressable via UUID. By appending an item's UUID to the given URL path of a collection you get the URL path of that item, e.g. `/api/my-fancy-model/01234567-1234-1234-1234-56789abcdef0`.


### The REST API

The provided routes implement these actions:

| Method | URL | Action |
|---|---|---|
| GET | `/api/model` | Lists items of selected model. |
| GET | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Fetches properties of selected item. |
| PUT | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Replaces all properties of selected item with those given in request body. Selected item is created when missing. |
| PATCH | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Adjusts selected item by replacing values of properties given in request body (leaving those missing in request body untouched). |
| POST | `/api/model` | Creates new item initialized with properties provided in request body. |
| DELETE | `/api/model/<uuid>`  | Removes selected item from model's collection. |
| HEAD | `/api/model` | Tests if selected model exists. |
| HEAD | `/api/model/<uuid>` | Tests if selected item exists. |

In addition following URLs are available for accessing schema information:

| Method | URL | Action |
|---|---|---|
| GET | `/api/.schema` | Lists schemata of all published models. |
| GET | `/api/model/.schema` | Fetches schema of selected model. |

The API is accepting and returning data in JSON format. Any returned data is always an object. When fetching items this object contains single property `items` containing all fetched items as array.

Response status code indicates basic result of either requests.

| Status | Reason |
|---|---|
| 200 | A request was successful. In case of HEAD-request the tested model or item exists. |
| 201 | A POST request was successful in creating another item. This isn't used when creating new item using PUT request, though. |
| 400 | A given UUID is malformed. |
| 404 | A requested model or item wasn't found. |
| 405 | A given method isn't allowed on selected model or item. This is basically a more specific information related to performing some invalid request like trying to PATCH or DELETE a whole model instead of a single item. |


### Convenience Routes

By default, the module is exposing another set of routes for every model that enables requesting either supported action using GET-requests. This is assumed to be very useful in development e.g. to conveniently add or remove items using regular browser.

The URL path is extended to insert an action's name after the model's name and before some optionally given UUID.

| Convenience Route | Related REST Action |
|---|---|
| `GET /api/model/create` | `POST /api/model` |
| `GET /api/model/write/<uuid>` | `PATCH /api/model/<uuid>` |
| `GET /api/model/replace/<uuid>` | `PUT /api/model/<uuid>` |
| `GET /api/model/has/<uuid>` | `HEAD /api/model/<uuid>` |
| `GET /api/model/remove/<uuid>` | `DELETE /api/model/<uuid>` |

There are no extra routes following this pattern for actions that are exposed via GET-methods already.

All request data is provided in query parameters instead of request body for GET requests don't have a body.

#### Disabling Feature

Disable this feature in the configuration file **config/model.js**:

```javascript
exports.model = {
    convenience: false,
};
``` 


### Extended Fetching of Items

Whenever fetching a list of items using GET request on a model's URL there are additional options for controlling the retrieved list.


#### Filtering

Using query parameter `q` the list of fetched items can be limited to those items matching criteria given in that query parameter. The abbreviated name `q` just refers to a _search query_.

##### Simple Comparisons

The search query may comply with the pattern `name:operation:value` to compare every item's property with a given value using one of these operations:
  
| Name | Test Operation           |
|------|--------------------------|
| eq   | is equal                 |
| neq  | is not equal             |
| lt   | is less than             |
| lte  | is less than or equal    |
| gt   | is greater than          |
| gte  | is greater than or equal |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=lastName:eq:Doe` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with property **lastName** equal given value **Doe**. The value may contain further colons.

##### Simple Unary Tests

Alternatively the search query may comply with the pattern `name:operation` for testing the named property using one of these supported operations:
  
| Name    | Test Operation                              |
|---------|---------------------------------------------|
| null    | property is set / has any value             |
| notnull | property is unset / does not have any value |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=lastName:null` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with unset property **lastName**.

##### Simple Unary Tests

Another kind of test operations are unary tests. A unary test is an operation which takes a single argument, only. This argument is the property's name the test is applied on. Related queries comply with the pattern `name:operation`.
  
| Name    | Test Operation                                                 |
|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| null    | property's value is unset                                      |
| notnull | property's value is set                                        |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=paid:null` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with value of property **paid** unset.

##### Simple Ternary Tests

A third type of test operations are ternary tests. This refers to operations consisting of three parameters: the property's name and two values instead of one to compare that property's values with. Related queries comply with the pattern `name:operation:value:value`, hence using colon in first given value is not supported.
  
| Name    | Test Operation                                                 |
|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| between | property's value is between the two given values (inclusively) |

For example, a GET-request for `/api/localEmployee?q=salary:between:2000:4000` will deliver all items of model **LocalEmployee** with value of property **salary** in range from 2000 to 4000.

##### Complex Tests

There will be more complex tests supported in future versions using different formats in query parameter `q`.


#### Sorting

Using query parameter `sortBy=lastName` a fetched list of items is sorted by values of named property (which is `lastName` in this example) in ascending order. By providing another query parameter `descending=1` the sorting is done in descending order.


#### Slicing

Query parameter `limit=n` is requesting to fetch at most **n** items. Parameter `offset=n` is requesting to skip **n** items before starting retrieval. Slicing is applied after sorting items.

When slicing this way only a subset of basically available items is fetched by intention. If you need to know the total number of available items when requesting a slice you can either set custom field `x-count` in request header or query parameter `count` to `1` or any other truthy value. This will have a slight negative impact on request performance, but causes delivery of the total number of matching items in a separate property `count` of response body as well as in response header named `x-count`.
